Proposal: i18n-system-languages (#569)
hober/web-extensions: proposals/i18n-getOSLanguage.md

# Proposal: i18n.getOSLanguage>

**Summary**

Allow to get the language of your operating system as an `IETF tag`

**Document Metadata**

> **Author:** carlosjeurissen

Reviewer: optional: maybe link to your github?  (Though I imagine you have carlosjeurissen just about everywhere : ))

Author: Added.

> 

Reviewer: This dropped the "sponsoring browser" item [here](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/blob/e02ace0c34a17ae99a446c6e73fb4db778f41a53/proposals/proposal_template.md?plain=1#L19).

That was added to ensure the proposals here don't become a graveyard of aspirational APIs and instead reflect ones that at least one browser is committed to implementing in the immediate future.

I'll need to do some quick investigation into the implementation.  If it looks straightforward, I'm comfortable putting Google Chrome as the sponsoring browser.

Author: Added back the Sponsoring browser with a TBD.

Reviewer 2: I'm supportive of sponsoring for Safari and plan to implement it as soon as we have consensus.

**Created:** 2024-03-18

**Related Issues:** https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/252

## Motivation

### Objective

> As browsers often do not directly use the OS language but some reflection of it based on what languages are supported by the browser UI.

Reviewer: This reads a little incompletely to me.

Maybe:

```suggestion
Allow extensions to display UI in the user's preferred language, even when this is distinct from the browser's UI language (which is restricted to languages supported by the browser).
```

Feel free to wordsmith.

Author: Rephrased to:
`Allow extensions to display UI in the user's system language, even when this is distinct from the browser's UI language (which is restricted to languages supported by the browser).`

#### Use Cases

Having the original OS language is useful for language-related extensions and for extensions who want to provide translations more true to the OS language. For example, to adapt to a specific sub-language, like Belgium-Dutch (nl-BE). While i18n.getUILanguage would return 'nl'.

### Known Consumers

Language-related extensions and extensions wanting to match the language of the OS more closely independent of the langauge of the browser.

## Specification

### Schema

> `i18n.getOSLanguage()` would synchronously return an IETF tag just like `i18n.getUILanguage()` does right now.

Reviewer: For completeness, can we link to the IETF spec for IETF tag?

Author: Added.

It would follow the following signature for [i18n.json](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/refs/heads/main/extensions/common/api/i18n.json):

```json
{
  "name": "getOSLanguage",
  "type": "function",
  "nocompile": true,
  "description": "Gets the UI language of the Operating System. This is different from $(ref:i18n.getUILanguage) which returns the UI language of the web browser.",
  "parameters": [],

>   "returns": {

Reviewer: This implies a synchronous return.  Is that a requirement?

(I'm not sure if we'd have the OS language available in the renderer today, unlike the UI language)

Author: In Mozilla Firefox, the OS language is available in the renderer synchronously. In general the motivation to return synchronously is to match `i18n.getUILanguage`. Having it synchronously is also very welcome to load locale data as quickly as possible for bidi, lang attributes, locale specific files and potentially in the future, passing it to an API like [i18n.getLanguageDictionary](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/274)

    "type": "string",
    "description": "An IETF BCP 47 language tag such as en-US or pt-BR."
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: nit: I'd lean towards describing these in typescript (for now), since it's a more portable format than Chromium's use of JSON schema.  Especially things like "nocompile" are very Chromium-specific.

That said, if other browser vendors are fine with (or prefer) this, I don't feel strongly, since, well, this is obviously good enough for Chromium : )

Reviewer 2: Agreed, TypeScript would make more sense.

### New Permissions

> As browser.i18n.getUILanguage does not require a permission. browser.i18n.getOSLanguage also should not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As `browser.i18n.getUILanguage()` does not require a permission, browser.i18n.getOSLanguage also should not.
```

### Manifest File Changes

No new manifest fields

## Security and Privacy

### Exposed Sensitive Data

The language of the OS will be purposely exposed.

## Alternatives

### Existing Workarounds

> There is no current workaround.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, if an extension wants to offer languages outside of what the browser supports, it must do so by presenting a user-facing options page.  There is no way to reasonably detect a language code outside of the browser's UI language with existing APIs.
```

Author: Rephrased to:
`Currently, if an extension wants to offer languages outside of what the current browser language uses, it must do so by presenting a user-facing options page. However, currently there is no way to reasonably detect a language code outside of the browser's UI language with existing APIs.`

### Open Web API

> To combat fingerprinting, this should not be an Open Web API. Just like browser.i18n.getUILanguage is not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To combat fingerprinting, this should not be an Open Web API, just like browser.i18n.getUILanguage is not.
```

> # Proposal: i18n.getOSLanguage>

Reviewer 3: What is the `>` doing at the end?

Author: Eh, it is not supposed to be there. Thanks for noting! Fixed.

**Summary**

> Allow to get the language of your operating system as an [BCP47 language tag](https://www.w3.org/International/core/langtags/rfc3066bis.html).

Reviewer 4: This is a really ancient link (thank you for discovering it so that we/i18n can fix it). Consider linking to the real deal:

```suggestion
Allows getting the language/locale of your operating system as a [BCP47 language tag](https://www.rfc-editor.org/bcp/bcp47.html)
```

I18N discussed this issue in our call of 2024-04-18. I will add comments to #252.

Author: Thanks for the update @aphillips ! Great to hear it was discussed. looking forward to the comments.

Author: @aphillips Updated the PR to address some of the feedback raised in #252. Namely splitting the method into two separate ones with better naming. See https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/569#issuecomment-2126669092

Seems all vendors have no objection to the changes and this PR. Is there anything you would like to add here?

> Allow to get the language of your operating system as an [BCP47 language tag](https://www.w3.org/International/core/langtags/rfc3066bis.html).

Reviewer 3: Given the discussion starting from https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/252#issuecomment-2027025304, should we rename the proposal to `i18n.getOSLanguages` and let it return an array?

And also, guarantee the array to be non-empty?

**Document Metadata**

**Author:** [carlosjeurissen](https://github.com/carlosjeurissen)

**Sponsoring Browser:** TBD

**Created:** 2024-03-18

**Related Issues:**
https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/252
https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1888486

## Motivation

### Objective

Allow extensions to display UI in the user's system language, even when this is distinct from the browser's UI language (which is restricted to languages supported by the browser).

#### Use Cases

Having the original OS language is useful for language-related extensions and for extensions who want to provide translations more true to the OS language. For example, to adapt to a specific sub-language, like Belgium-Dutch (nl-BE). While i18n.getUILanguage would return 'nl'.

### Known Consumers

Language-related extensions and extensions wanting to match the language of the OS more closely independent of the langauge of the browser.

## Specification

### Schema

> `i18n.getOSLanguage()` would synchronously return an [IETF tag](https://www.w3.org/International/core/langtags/rfc3066bis.html) just like `i18n.getUILanguage()` does right now.

Reviewer 4: The proper reference here is IETF BCP47. The current RFCs for that are 5646 and 4647. Generally speaking its common to talk about a "BCP47 language tag" or just "language tag". See also the [I18N Glossary](https://www.w3.org/TR/i18n-glossary) for useful links to I18N terminology for the Web.

Author: @aphillips Thanks for the references! Updated the proposal to reflect this!

> It would follow the following signature for [i18n.json](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/refs/heads/main/extensions/common/api/i18n.json):

Reviewer 3: When referencing source code, try to use a permalink where possible. In this case there has been a request to use IDL instead of JSON, so this line will probably end up being dropped. If not, here is the permalink: https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/4299ce68496b32ba309e2f012e0db5b4b8cd478a/extensions/common/api/i18n.json

Author: Good to know! Updated the proposal to reflect this!
